# Lineage Tree Generation

Lineage tree generation for clonal families of antibody sequences, leveraging the FastBCR and ClonalTree tools.

## Running Pipelines
Run the following code to run the batch jobs from scratch

### Clone Git Repo
```
git clone https://github.com/Profluent-AI/lineage_tree.git
cd lineage_tree
```

### FastBCR
```
python generate_gcp_input_list.py
gcloud beta batch jobs submit job-fastbcr-[X] --location us-central1 --config fastBCR_Docker/fastBCR_batch_config.json
```

### ClonalTree
```
./clonalTree_Docker/generate_clonalTree_batch_input.sh
gcloud beta batch jobs submit job-ClonalTree-[X] --location us-central1 --config clonalTree_Docker/clonalTree_batch_config.json
```

## Docker Images

Production docker images for fastBCR and ClonalTree are located in the GCP artifcat registry as follows:
- us-central1-docker.pkg.dev/profluent-evo/ab-lineages/fastbcr:prod_timing
- us-central1-docker.pkg.dev/profluent-evo/ab-lineages/clonaltree:prod

## Full Pipeline Overview

1. Batch input generation for fastBCR. The fastBCR batch input is the `human_unpaired_heavy_run_to_files.tsv` file mapping run_id to a list of file_paths.
   1. Running `python generate_gcp_input_list.py` will generate the fastBCR batch input and store it at `gs://proevo-ab/lineages/fastbcr/batch/run_to_files.tsv`
2. Run the GCP batch job for fastBCR
   1. `gcloud beta batch jobs submit job-fastbcr-batch-[X] --location us-central1 --config fastBCR_Docker/fastBCR_batch_config.json`
3. Batch input generation for ClonalTree. The ClonalTree input is a list of all .fasta files generated from the fastBCR pipeline.
   1. Run `./clonalTree_Docker/generate_clonalTree_batch_input.sh`. ClonalTree batch_input will be stored at `gs://proevo-ab/lineages/clonalTree/batch/clonalTree_batch_input.txt`
4. Run the GCP batch job for ClonalTree
   1. `gcloud beta batch jobs submit job-clonaltree-batch-[X] --location us-central1 --config clonalTree_Docker/clonalTree_batch_config.json`

## Pipeline Inputs and Outputs

All input and output files, including batch_inputs and pipeline outputs, are stored in GCS, within the `profluent-evo` bioinformatics project. Specifically, all lineage tree data is stored within the `proevo-ab/lineages` directory.

### FastBCR 

#### FastBCR Input
- Batch Input: `proevo-ab/lineages/fastbcr/batch`
- Batch inputs are generated from the raw OAS data files stored in `proevo-ab/oas/unpaired/unpaired_human/unpaired_human_heavy`
- Different raw OAS file directories can be generated as batch_input files by modifying the input_dir path in `generate_gcp_input_list.py`

#### FastBCR Output
- All fastBCR pipeline outputs are stored in the `proevo-ab/lineages/fastbcr/output` directory.
- The `runs/` directory contains the .fasta file outputs of fastBCR, which correspond to inferred clonal families. The FASTA files are organized into their run directories. These FASTA files are used as the input to ClonalTree
- `run_stats` contains clonal family statistics, organized by each run.
  - Contains average number of clonal families, average size of clonal families, percentage of raw sequences actually mapped to clonal families, and some timing statistics
- `run_clonotypes` is the mapping of the inferred clonotypes from fastBCR back to their original OAS data files.
  - `clonotype_index` is the fastBCR generated clonotype index. Clonotypes may be linked to multiple raw sequence indices from the OAS data file
  - `orign_index` is the raw OAS dataframe index for the representative sequence that is used for the clonotype. Should be contained within the `index_match` list
  - The raw sequence indices are stored in the `index_match` column. `index_match` is an R list of all the dataframe indices that match up to this clonotype
  
### ClonalTree
All ClonalTree related files are stored in the `proevo-ab/lineages/clonalTree` GCS directory.

#### ClonalTree Input
- Batch input for the ClonalTree pipeline is generated from the FASTA files generated by fastBCR.
- These Batch inputs are stored at `proevo-ab/lineages/clonalTree/batch`

#### ClonalTree Outputs
ClonalTree outputs both standard .nk files and .nk.csv files that are more human interpretable.
- Lineage trees are stored in the `proevo-ab/lineages/clonalTree/output/runs` directory, organized by run.

## Analysis 
- Analysis is within the `analysis/` directory. fastBCR and ClonalTree stats are organized in their own notebooks.